JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
ALISON STEWART: And I'm Alison
Stewart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
off to a rocky start.
The Republican-controlled
Congress opens the
new session with a fight over
ethics.
ALISON STEWART: Also ahead this
Tuesday, Judy
sits down for the first part of
an interview
with CIA Director John Brennan
to talk about
Russia, hacking and more.
JOHN BRENNAN, CIA Director:
There are so many
ways to get into the digital
domain right
now and to collect information.
And it's one of the things that
we, as a country,
I don't think, have come to
terms with, just
how vulnerable we are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And caught in the
aftermath
of Turkey's failed coup,
soldiers flee their
homeland, while the president
demands their
return.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Turkey's
President Erdogan
has been ramping up the rhetoric
in relation
to the military personnel
accused of complicity
in the coup.
Erdogan has said it is simply
inexcusable
to give shelter to people he
calls terrorist
soldiers.
ALISON STEWART: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening, and
happy new
year.
We're going to be having some
guests joining
me here at the "NewsHour" anchor
desk in the
coming weeks.
Tonight, it's Alison Stewart,
who many of
you will recognize from the
weekend "NewsHour."
Welcome, Alison.
ALISON STEWART: Well, thank you,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in our lead
story tonight:
The 115th Congress is officially
off and running,
but House Republicans stumbled
out of the
gate on this opening day.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: For
Republicans, day one
of Congress and what they hope
is a bright
now era for their party started
with old issues
of internal dispute.
House Republicans overnight
rebelled against
Paul Ryan and other leaders to
try and change
a House ethics panel.
Then, this morning, they
reversed course.
The proposed change was about
the independent
Office of Congressional Ethics,
or OCE, which
reviews accusations.
It cannot punish members itself,
but it can
refer cases to the House Ethics
Committee.
The proposed revision would have
changed the
office's name to Complaint
Review and, more
notably, would have stripped its
independence,
putting it under the control of
the House
Ethics Committee.
Today, some, like Iowa's Steve
King, were
dismayed that the measure was
pulled.
REP.
STEVE KING (R), Iowa: I think we
should have
gone forward.
And I'm going to push for the
full disbandment
and abolishment of the OCE,
because they're
based upon the wrong principles.
And no one should have to be
subjected to
public criticism that's
generated by anonymous
accusers.
LISA DESJARDINS: But more
Republicans, like
outgoing Ethics Committee
Chairman Charlie
Dent, said the change would have
been a mistake.
REP.
CHARLIE DENT (R), Pennsylvania:
I thought
it wasn't the right way to
proceed.
LISA DESJARDINS: Perhaps no
coincidence, also
saying it was a mistake was
president-elect
Trump, who asked on Twitter if
the change
should be a priority.
And House Democratic Leader
Nancy Pelosi slammed
Republicans, writing that the
move showed
clear contempt for ethics.
It all led to rare tension on
what is usually
a happily bipartisan day with
members' families.
During the roll call vote for
speaker, some
Democrats pointedly mentioned
the need for
strong ethics, sparking boos
from Republicans.
(BOOING)
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
Paul Ryan.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: But now
beginning his first
full term as speaker, Paul Ryan
spoke not
to dissatisfied members, but to
dissatisfied
voters.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: So,
I want to say to the American
people, we hear
you.
We will do right by you.
And we will deliver.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the Senate,
there was
less political theater, but more
signs of
serious battles ahead, as new
Senate Democratic
Minority Leader Chuck Schumer
took on the
mantle of a key opposition voice
to president-elect-Trump
on Obamacare repeal.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: Mr.
President-elect, what is your
plan to make
sure all Americans can get
affordable health
care?
LISA DESJARDINS: And a big day
today, but
an even bigger day tomorrow up
here, when
President Obama and vice
president-elect Mike
Pence will both be here to talk
to their various
parties about Obamacare -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, what
does this split
among Republicans over the
ethics office tell
us about what's coming up ahead?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think it has
very serious
implications.
Republicans have long had
problems with issues
of rules and procedures, and
those continue.
There is a lot of unhappiness
with the conference.
But I think the bigger point
here is that
they remain a divided conference
on some serious
issues.
And one big one is coming up in
which no one
in America has really the clear
direction
yet, which is, how do you
replace Obamacare?
So the House caucus with the
Republicans is
having trouble with this Office
of Congressional
Ethics, which they have been
talking about
for years amongst themselves.
It raises questions about how
they will form
a plan to replace Obamacare in
the next year,
if that is possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, we heard
Speaker Ryan
say, among other things, "We
hear you," talking
to the voters.
And, in fact, it was some voters
who were
weighing in today that had
something to do
with this ethics outcome, didn't
it?
LISA DESJARDINS: It's such a
good point.
I think that what we're seeing
here is, while
voters are watching President
Trump, they're
also very closely watching this
Congress.
And it's clear that voters don't
yet trust
Republicans here in Congress
fully, and they're
watching carefully.
They reacted very quickly,
overwhelming phone
calls here at the Capitol.
I talked to a dozen members of
Congress who
said, Republicans and Democrats,
that their
phone lines were clogged, and it
was about
that ethics change.
I talked to a House operator who
told me it
was just a mess, all those calls
coming in.
And, Judy, what's amazing, that
change happened
late last night.
Voters got up and made those
phone calls right
away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa, we also
heard a little
bit there from Chuck Schumer,
the incoming
Democratic leader in the Senate.
What is the opposition strategy
as of now?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Call him maybe the opposition in
chief.
Democrats have lot of recovery
to do.
It's not clear who will be their
leading voice,
but right now Chuck Schumer
seems to be it.
I'm not sure what their strategy
is yet.
Today, they tried out one, which
is to question
how Donald Trump operates.
In his speech today, Chuck
assumer said it's
irresponsible the way that
Donald Trump makes
decisions.
He pointed to his tweets.
That's something we have heard
before, Judy.
But hearing that, I thought,
well, I'm not
sure that Trump voters, that
really hits where
they are about Donald Trump.
So, I think we're going to see a
lot of different
attempts at answering Donald
Trump.
I'm not sure Democrats have
figured out how
to do it quite yet, but Chuck
Schumer is the
man to watch.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In just a few
seconds, Lisa,
what's the word on Republican
plans on Obamacare?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Watch in the next couple of
days, especially
tomorrow morning, Judy, when
President Obama
tries to rally his Democrat and
vice president-elect
Mike Pence tries to rally his
Republicans.
It's a several-step process
we're going to
be talking about for weeks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa
Desjardins is going
to be right up there reporting.
Thank you, Lisa.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
ALISON STEWART: In the day's
other news: President-elect
Trump criticized General Motors
for building
compact cars in Mexico, on the
same day Ford
announced plans of its own to
invest in a
plant in the U.S.
In a tweet aimed at GM, Mr.
Trump warned -- quote
-- "Make in USA or pay big
border tax."
The company responded with a
statement that
only a tiny fraction of its
Chevy Cruze compacts
are made in Mexico.
In the past, Mr. Trump had
criticized Ford's
plans to build its Focus small
car in Mexico.
Today, Ford shifted gears, with
its CEO pointing
to the new administration.
MARK FIELDS, CEO, Ford Motor
Company: We're
also encouraged by the
pro-growth policies
that president-elect Trump and
the new Congress
have indicated that they will
pursue.
And we believe these tax and
regulatory reforms
are critically important to
boost U.S. competitiveness
and of course drive a resurgence
in American
manufacturing and high-tech
innovation.
ALISON STEWART: Ford now plans
to invest $700
million in an existing Michigan
plant that
has been making the Focus.
We will take a closer look at
all of this
later in the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
president-elect
tapped
Robert Lighthizer as his nominee
for U.S.
trade representative.
Lighthizer served as a deputy in
that office
during the Reagan administration
and has called
for a heavy tariff on imported
goods from
China.
In a statement, the
president-elect said Lighthizer
will fight for -- quote -- "good
trade deals
that put the American worker
first."
ALISON STEWART: In Turkey,
police spent another
day hunting for the suspect in
that deadly
new years attack on an Istanbul
club.
Jonathan Rugman of Independent
Television
News has the latest.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: It was a new
year countdown
to a massacre; 75 minutes later,
a gunman
opened fire here, killing 39
people and injuring
69 others.
Turkish media claimed this is
the chief suspect
filming himself in the center of
Istanbul
-- we don't know when --
although most reporting,
including this, is based on
government leaks,
and some of it has turned out to
be false.
Two foreign nationals have been
arrested at
Istanbul's main airport in
connection with
the attack.
Sixteen people have been
detained in all.
The authorities said yesterday
they're close
to identifying the gunman.
Today, officials were silent on
that.
There was only one policeman on
duty outside
one of Istanbul's most famous
nightclubs,
even though tens of thousands of
extra police
were supposedly deployed in the
city on New
Year's Eve.
This evening, hundreds joined a
protest against
the violence, and Turkey's main
opposition
leader called on the government
to resign.
People are frightened of
criticizing President
Erdogan's increasingly
repressive administration,
though some Turks now are.
MAN (through translator): The
only way to
get over this kind of situation
is to bring
more democracy and freedom and
peace and more
secular institutions.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: And after the
latest terrorist
attack, this is an even more
febrile, volatile,
and divided country, in the
thrall of a government
promising security, but failing
to deliver
it.
ALISON STEWART: The Islamic
State group has
claimed responsibility for the
nightclub attack.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Doubts are rising
about the
cease-fire in Syria, as
government forces
press an offensive outside
Damascus.
The rebel-held Barada Valley
controls the
water supply for millions of
people in and
around the capital.
The government says it's
targeting members
of an al-Qaida affiliate who are
not part
of the cease-fire.
ALISON STEWART: Here in this
country, cleanup
crews are working across the
Deep South after
a night of killer storms.
Four people died when a possible
tornado knocked
a tree onto their mobile home in
Rehobeth,
Alabama.
And, in Florida, a man drowned
in floodwater.
The line of severe thunderstorms
brought heavy
flooding rains and multiple
reports of tornado
sightings.
Alabama, Georgia and the Florida
Panhandle
were the worst hit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It turns out
investigators
have found no evidence that
Russian hackers
attacked an electrical utility
in Vermont.
The Washington Post reports that
malware found
on a laptop doesn't appear
connected to the
Russian hacking operation known
as Grizzly
Steppe.
Initial reports last week raised
fears the
Russians could be trying to
penetrate the
country's electric grid.
ALISON STEWART: And the new year
got off to
a good start on Wall Street,
with a boost
from tech and health care
stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 119
points to close at 19881.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 46
points, and the
S&P 500 added 19.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
my conversation with the CIA
director; Turkish
soldiers seeking safe haven
following a failed
coup attempt; and much more.
soldiers seeking safe haven
following a failed
coup attempt; and much more.
Now we begin a series of
conversations with
top officials in the Obama
administration,
as its eight years in office
come to a close.
John Brennan has served as
director of the
Central Intelligence Agency
since March of
2013.
It's an agency he knew well
before his tenure
as director.
He was a station chief overseas,
and an analyst
and executive in the agency for
25 years.
I began our conversation by
asking about the
status of the intelligence
community's report
on Russia's hacking of the
election.
JOHN BRENNAN, CIA Director: The
report is
in its final throes of
production.
And so the report will be shared
with the
president, who ordered up this
comprehensive
review, within days.
And the DNI, Jim Clapper, is the
one who is
leading this effort on behalf of
the intelligence
community.
And so it's been a very, very
rigorous and
diligent review to make sure
that we have
full appreciation of all the
intelligence
that's relevant.
And I think that the story in
there, the intelligence
in there will be exactly what
the president
asked for, a comprehensive and
thorough review
about what happened during our
recent election
and Russian involvement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Will it prove
beyond a shadow
of a doubt that Russian
officials were trying
to interfere with the U.S.
election?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, I think, as
Jim Clapper
and Jeh Johnson said as early as
December,
that there was clear evidence
that the Russians
were interfering in the
election.
And so I'm not going to reveal
the contents
of that report, because it is
still under
seal, and it will be provided to
the president
and to others, as appropriate.
But it will address what Russia
was doing,
how it was doing it, and how we
know that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I ask because, as
you know,
there are many doubters out
there.
One of your former predecessors,
one of your
predecessors at the CIA, Jim
Woolsey, said
in an interview just this
morning that it
wasn't just the Russians.
He said there were other
countries likely
involved.
He mentioned China, Iran.
Are you convinced it was just
Russia?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, we know that
a number
of countries are involved in the
digital domain
and doing things in terms of
collecting information
and exposing information.
But this report focuses on what
Russia specifically
did in the election.
And so I think that the
intelligence carries
the analysis and the assessments
in it.
And I will leave it to the
president and others
to then make decisions about how
that report
is going to be handled, and what
information
will be shared and with whom.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you ruling
out hacking
by other countries?
JOHN BRENNAN: There is a lot of
activity that
is out there, but one of the
things that we
want to make sure we understand
is what might
some of our adversaries be doing
to disrupt
one of the foundation tenets of
our democracy,
which is our presidential
election?
JUDY WOODRUFF: But let me -- I
want to continue
with the doubters, because
Donald Trump himself
has been questioning this,
saying, how do
you know it's the Russians?
He's pointed to the fact -- in
fact, he said
a number of times now that the
CIA has been
wrong before.
He keeps referring to the
allegations that
there were weapons...
JOHN BRENNAN: Iraq WMD.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, Iraq weapons
of mass destruction,
which was wrong.
JOHN BRENNAN: Right.
And in the aftermath of that,
there was a
total review of the review
process and the
analytic process and the
assessments that
are done within the intelligence
community,
with a number of steps that were
taken to
make sure that we are going to
be as accurate
as possible.
And so it's been light-years
since that Iraq
WMD report has been done.
And there has been tremendous, I
think, further
development of our analytic
capabilities,
as well as our intelligence
collection capabilities.
There is no intelligence
community worldwide
that has the capabilities, the
expertise,
the analytic capability as the
U.S. intelligence
community.
And so I would suggest to
individuals who
have not yet seen the report,
who have not
yet been briefed on it that they
wait and
see what it is that the
intelligence community
is putting forward before they
make those
judgments.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you were
telling me that
president-elect Trump will see
this report
before the public does.
JOHN BRENNAN: The
president-elect will be
entitled to receiving briefings,
the report
itself, if President Obama says
that that's
what should happen.
But, absolutely, as the incoming
administration
and the incoming president, he
will be entitled
to the full report.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about WikiLeaks.
The organization that produced
these leaks
about the Democrats in this in
this -- in
the election, founded by Julian
Assange, he
told me in an interview last
fall, he reiterated
just in the last couple of days
that WikiLeaks
didn't get this information from
the Russians
or from any state actor.
So, how does that square with
what you're
saying?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, he's not
exactly a bastion
of truth and integrity.
And so, therefore, I wouldn't
ascribe to any
of these individual making
comments that it
is providing the whole,
unvarnished truth.
Again, this report is going to
include what
it is that we know about what
happened, what
was collected, what was
disclosed, and what
the purpose and intent of that
effort was.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Will it make
clear what the
connection was between the
Russians and WikiLeaks,
how WikiLeaks got it?
JOHN BRENNAN: Again, I'm not
going to get
ahead of this report coming out.
These are things that will be
addressed and
are addressed in the report.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The intelligence
community,
officials in the intelligence
community have
told reporters that it wasn't
just the Democrats.
It was the Republicans.
Republican National Committee
was also hacked.
Was it?
And, if so, why wasn't that
material leaked?
JOHN BRENNAN: Again, I am not
going to get
ahead of the release of this
report to the
president and to others.
But there is active collection
that goes on
in that cyber-realm by a number
of our adversaries
and a number of countries.
And so I don't think one should
think that
certain elements or entities are
protected
from that type of collection.
But there's collection and then
there's also
disclosure.
And so what it is that we do is
try to find
out what people are doing, who
is responsible
for it, and what their intention
is, and how
they're seeking to use it to
advantage themselves
and to disadvantage U.S.
national security.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think the
motive of
the Russians was to help Donald
Trump?
JOHN BRENNAN: Again, that's one
of the things
that will be addressed inside
the report.
I'm not going to address that in
advance of
its release.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And if I ask you
about whether
the Trump campaign was hacked,
the answer
would be?
JOHN BRENNAN: I would say that's
a question
to ask the Trump campaign, and
those agencies
that are responsible for
domestic intelligence
and homeland security.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about
Trump businesses
since he became a prominent
candidate for
president?
JOHN BRENNAN: Again, that is
something for
others, not for the CIA director
to address.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, I ask because
people are
pointing out the fact that there
are buildings
with Trump on them, the Trump
label on them,
located all over the world.
Are those buildings now a target
because Donald
Trump is the next president?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, I think
there are a lot
of identifiers of the United
States and the
U.S. government, some that are
very iconic.
And I think the Trump name is
something that
is associated more and more
today because
he's been elected our president
that identifies
with the United States, the
United States
government.
So, it's one of the things that
I think those
responsible for security of
those facilities,
as well as for the systems and
networks, need
to take into account, that, in
this day and
age where there are so many ways
to damage
buildings, infrastructure,
systems and networks,
they need on put in place the
appropriate
safeguards to protect themselves
from these
types of attacks, whether they
be kinetic
attacks or cyber-attacks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it the CIA's
or the intelligence
community's fault that this
happened, or is
it the individual political
organizations
that were hacked?
Is it their responsibility?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, I think
there are so many
ways to get into the digital
domain right
now and to collect information.
And that's one of the things
that I really
hope that the next
administration picks up
on what the Obama administration
did, was
to try to better secure our
digital environments.
And it's one of the things we as
a country,
I don't think, have come to
terms with, just
how vulnerable we are to these
types of attacks
from adversaries, whether it's
to collect
information, personal
identifying information,
or it's to bring down
infrastructure, or to
prevent our military services
from carrying
out their duties.
So, this is something that I
think is going
to be sort of the wave of the
future in terms
of what it is that we as a
country need to
do in order to protect
ourselves, our future,
our prosperity.
And that environment right now
still is very
vulnerable to nation states, to
organizations,
to hacktivists, to individuals
who have the
talent and the capability to
navigate inside
of systems and networks and
disable or destroy
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But my question
is, should
the intelligence community have
prevented
this, have seen it coming and
stopped it?
JOHN BRENNAN: The intelligence
community has
a responsibility to provide our
policy-makers,
as well as officials with law
enforcement,
homeland security
responsibilities, the best
intelligence we have about what
adversaries'
capabilities and intents are.
And that's what we do.
We try to make sure they
understand what types
of attacks we could be seeing in
the cyber-realm,
what they might be trying to
accomplish, under
what scenarios might they be
able -- might
they leverage those
capabilities.
A lot of countries have the
ability to do
damage in that cyber-domain.
They decide not to do it because
they know
that there would be steps taken
against them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: My question,
though, still
is, was it the intelligence
community's responsibility
to prevent this from happening?
JOHN BRENNAN: No, not the
intelligence community's
responsibility.
We share responsibility with the
rest of the
government.
But it's not just the government
that has
responsibility.
We're talking about a digital
environment
that is 85 percent owned by the
private sector,
owned and operated by the
private sector.
So, the government's ability to
protect that
system from those penetrations
is limited.
That's why there needs to be a
national consensus
on what the role of the
government is going
to be, the law enforcement
community, what
the FBI is supposed to be doing.
We have seen these battles
raging about what
the bureau is able to do with
the various
devices and with this
unbreakable encryption.
Well, we need to come to terms
with this reality
that, in the 21st century, these
systems are
going to be used to advance the
human condition,
but they're also going to be
used by our adversaries,
whether they be terrorists,
proliferators,
pedophiles, or others.
And what are we going to allow
the government
to do to protect those systems?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did the CIA, did
the intelligence
community underestimate Vladimir
Putin?
JOHN BRENNAN: Underestimate?
No, I think we always felt as
though he was
somebody who had a very
assertive and aggressive
strain.
We see what he's done in places
like Crimea
and Ukraine and in Syria.
He tends to flex muscles, not
just on himself,
but also in terms of Russia's
military capabilities.
He plays by his own rules in
terms of what
it is that he does in some of
these theaters
of conflict.
So I don't think we
underestimated him.
He has sought to advance
Russia's interests
in areas where there have been
political vacuums
and conflicts.
But he doesn't ascribe to the
same types of
rules that we do, for example,
in law of armed
conflict.
What the Russians have done in
Syria in terms
of some of the scorched-earth
policy that
they have pursued that have led
to devastation
and thousands upon thousands of
innocent deaths,
that's not something that the
United States
would ever do in any of these
military conflicts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did the United
States, did
the intelligence community miss
the fact that
Russia was going to get involved
in Syria?
That wasn't known ahead of time.
JOHN BRENNAN: Oh, well, it was.
Russia has had a 50-, 60-year
investment in
Syria.
They have had military bases
there, military
advisers and facilities.
They ratcheted up the support to
the Bashar
Assad regime, as the opposition
gained strength
and as the Syrian regime
continued to be degraded
by the opposition forces.
So, we could see the Russians
were not going
to abandon a long-term ally.
They were going to invest more
in protecting
that ally.
There have been negotiations
going on to try
to get the Russians and others
to understand
that Bashar Assad is part of the
problem.
He's not part of the solution.
But they decided to double down
and to bring
in their latest weaponry, both
in terms of
fixed and rotor-wing aircraft,
tanks, APCs,
other types of things.
So they have a major investment
in Syria.
And the opposition was -- as
good as they
were putting up a fight against
the regime,
they were fighting the Syrians.
They were fighting the Iranians.
They have been fighting
Hezbollah, as well
as the Russian military.
So the odds were stacked against
them.
But the Russians decided that
they were not
going to allow the Free Syrian
Army, the opposition,
that have legitimate grievances
against the
Assad regime to prevail.
Unfortunately, the Russians
painted the entire
opposition as terrorists.
And that's why they undertook
this very bold,
and, in my mind, in many
respects, reckless
military action to mow down so
many Syrians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But could the
situation in
Syria have been better by any
degree had the
U.S. gotten more involved?
JOHN BRENNAN: You know, 20/20
hindsight is
quite -- you know, it's
illuminating, looking
at it in the rear-view mirror in
terms of
what could have happened, based
on the things
that did happen.
There has been an unfortunate
turn of events
over the last several years.
When the Syrian revolution
started, the Arab
spring, there was no such thing
as ISIL.
ISIL was al-Qaida in Iraq and it
was just
less than 1,000 individuals.
There was a wave then of
developments inside
of Syria and Iraq that resulted
in current-day
Syria.
No one could have envisioned
that, in terms
of the series of events that
took place.
So, do we lament what has
happened in Syria?
Absolutely.
If we had a chance to do it over
again, would
there have been some adjustments
and changes?
I can't speak for policy-makers.
I'm not a policy-maker.
But when I look back, in light
of the way
things evolved, I think that
there could have
been some adjustments to some of
the policies,
not just by the United States,
but by other
countries, in order to address
this question
earlier or, and not allow the
ISILs and the
Jabhat al-Nusra, the al-Qaidas
to gain momentum
and steam and taking advantage
of the destruction
of that country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, not getting
involved turns
out to be something that's
regretted?
JOHN BRENNAN: Well, I think the
way that the
situation unfolded was -- is
regrettable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: CIA Director John
Brennan.
Tune in tomorrow night for part
two of our
conversation, where we look
ahead to the U.S.
relationship with Russia in the
Trump administration.
ALISON STEWART: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
economics
and politics behind Ford's
decision to invest
more in Michigan; and President
Obama's enduring
mark on the U.S. education
system.
But first: In Turkey, President
Recep Tayyip
Erdogan is pushing NATO allies
to return hundreds
of officers and soldiers who've
sought asylum
in other countries following the
coup attempt
last July aimed at toppling his
government.
In Greece, eight wanted Turkish
military personnel
are fighting extradition.
And since the coup, President
Erdogan has
disputed a longstanding border
treaty between
the two countries.
Military analysts warn that
relations between
Greece and Turkey are at their
lowest point
in more than 20 years.
From Greece, Malcolm Brabant
reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The attempted
coup against
President Erdogan only lasted a
few hours
in July.
But the clashes left about 300
dead and more
than 2,000 injured.
(GUNFIRE)
MALCOLM BRABANT: Within hours of
President
Erdogan wrestling back control,
eight Turkish
military personnel flew to
Northern Greece
and sought political asylum.
They went to court on charges of
entering
the country illegally amid
Turkish claims
that they were terrorists.
Since then, they have been
fighting extradition,
arguing that they risk a death
sentence if
returned.
The eight Turkish soldiers and
pilots are
currently being held at this
police station
on the outskirts of Athens.
STAVROULA TOMARA, Attorney: They
realize that
they are held here as prisoners,
basically
as prisoners of war.
This is how I would name them.
They have been extremely
depressed.
They are anxious.
And they are frightened, scared,
extremely
scared about what's going to
happen.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Stavroula
Tomara is one of
the lawyers trying to prevent
their extradition.
She insists their claims for
asylum are entirely
justified.
STAVROULA TOMARA: These people
were persecuted
due to the reasons of political
opinions and
social status they had.
They were Kemalists.
They are Kemalists.
And they were in a social group
that is being
persecuted.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Kemalists
uphold the ideals
of Kemal Ataturk, the First
World War hero
who modernized Turkey by turning
it into a
secular, Westward-oriented
state.
The army's traditional role,
buttressing secularism,
has been eroded under President
Erdogan and
his vision of Turkey as a
regional superpower
with conservative Islam at its
core.
Erdogan alleges that this man
orchestrated
the coup.
His name is Fethullah Gulen.
And he is living in exile in
Pennsylvania,
where he runs an organization
that purports
to promote moderate Islamic
values.
Erdogan accuses him of running a
terrorist
group.
On several occasions, he's
expressed anger
that Turkey's NATO allies refuse
to extradite
military personnel seeking
asylum in countries
across the alliance, from the
United States
to Belgium.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): Belgium is now an
important center
for militants.
While important things happen,
while our mosques
are set on fire, nobody seems to
care.
Instead of saying thank you to
my state, which
put down the attempted coup in
my country,
you are standing by the
plotters.
The mutineers are already in
your country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Turkey's
President Erdogan
has been ramping up the rhetoric
in relation
to the military personnel
accused of complicity
in the coup and seeking asylum
in NATO countries.
Erdogan has said it is simply
inexcusable
to give shelter to people he
calls terrorist
soldiers.
Despite international concerns
about Turkey's
attitude towards human rights,
NATO has been
at pains not to upset Turkey and
its unpredictable
president.
Such is its strategic
importance.
At a recent news conference, the
NATO secretary-general,
Jens Stoltenberg, expressed
solidarity with
Turkey.
JENS STOLTENBERG, NATO
Secretary-General:
It was shocking to visit the
National Assembly
in Ankara, where I saw the
damage caused by
bombs from F-16s.
And, of course, Turkey has the
right to prosecute
those behind the failed coup
attempt.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And Stoltenberg
avoided taking
sides over the extradition
question.
JENS STOLTENBERG: Regarding the
Turkish officers,
it is up to the nations to
assess and to make
decisions on requests for
asylum.
That's not a NATO decision.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's estimated
that 70,000
people have been arrested in
what critics
describe as a post-coup purge.
As a result, hundreds of Turkish
officers
serving in NATO countries have
defied orders
to return and have sought
asylum.
The highest-ranking asylum
seeker to go public
was stationed at the giant
Ramstein Base in
Germany.
He is air force Brigadier Mehmet
Yalinalp.
MEHMET YALINALP, Accused Turkish
Air Force
Officer: What I see is, the
number of people
who have this common
denominator, like having
firm belief in Ataturk's
founding principles
of our state, democracy, freedom
of speech,
openness, integration with the
West in values,
of course, have been pulled into
a list of
purge, and they are pushed away
from the government.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Vice President
Joe Biden
tasted Erdogan's anger during a
visit to Ankara
in August, when he was urged to
extradite
Fethullah Gulen, the man
Turkey's president
blames for the coup.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (through
translator):
According to the extradition of
criminals
treaty between the two
countries, people like
Gulen would be at least taken
under custody,
arrested and remain under arrest
throughout
the trial.
This person continues to manage
this terrorist
organization from where he is.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: We are determined to
listen to every
scrap of evidence that Turkey
can provide
or that we can find out about.
But, again, I say to the people
of Turkey,
what possible motive could we
have to in fact
harbor a terrorist?
MALCOLM BRABANT: But of all the
NATO countries
resisting Turkey's will, it is
Greece that
is facing greatest pressure in a
region popular
with European vacationers.
Turkish mainland resorts like
Bodrum are just
five miles or so from the Greek
islands in
the Aegean Sea.
Greek airspace above the islands
is frequently
breached by Turkish warplanes
probing defenses
and testing Athens' resolve.
Greece and Turkey almost went to
war 20 years
ago over a small uninhabited
islet called
Imia, which is not very far away
from here.
Military analysts say that the
hostile atmosphere
that prevailed then has returned
since President
Erdogan announced that he's not
happy with
the Treaty of Lausanne, which
defines Greek
and Turkish territory.
That treaty was signed in 1923.
And so, for almost a century, it
has been
the guarantor of peaceful, if
antagonistic,
coexistence.
But there are genuine fears here
that these
islands are about to become less
tranquil.
Military analyst Athanasios
Drougas is concerned
that disputes over the Turkish
soldiers and
territory in the eastern Aegean
Sea could
whip up into a perfect storm.
ATHANASIOS DROUGAS, Military
Analyst: We would
probably see, as a scenario,
Turks to be on
a Greek island or some rocks in
the Aegean
Sea.
I'm talking about skirmishes,
not, of course,
a total war, because, as you
know, Greece
and Turkey are members of NATO,
and then we
will have American or NATO
diplomatic intervention.
MALCOLM BRABANT: NATO warships
are currently
patrolling the Aegean to
discourage migrants
from attempting to reach the
Greek islands.
Following a turbulent 2016, and
a potentially
dangerous 2017, the last thing
NATO wants
is serious trouble between
so-called allies.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Greece.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today's
announcement by the
Ford Motor Company that it would
add 700 more
jobs at a Michigan plant came
after it became
one of a number of companies
squarely in the
eye of president-elect Trump.
William Brangham follows up on
what's behind
this move and others like it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Ford
announcement follows
moves from several other
companies saying
they too might keep some jobs in
the U.S.
that were planned for Mexico or
elsewhere.
The president-elect has
repeatedly tweeted
about some of these companies,
including Ford,
and pressing them to keep jobs
in the U.S.
Ford said today that it didn't
consult with
Mr. Trump on their Michigan
decision.
Josh Boak has been covering the
story for
the Associated Press.
And he joins me now.
So, Josh, bring us up to speed.
What did Ford agree to do today?
JOSH BOAK, Associated Press:
Ford announced
that it wasn't going to build a
$1.6 billion
plant in Mexico.
There were a few reasons for
that, one of
which was that the plant was
going to build
Ford Focuses.
And sales of that car have
dipped as oil prices
have fallen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is a
little, small,
fuel-efficient vehicle.
JOSH BOAK: Exactly.
But the other major impact has
been Donald
Trump on Twitter talking about
companies and
what he wants to see them do,
and those two
seem to have combined together.
Ford's own CEO said he hoped
that Trump's
policies on deregulation and
taxes would be
good for the company and good
for the country.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As we
mentioned before,
this follows moves where Trump
has targeted
other companies, Carrier,
Boeing, Lockheed
Martin.
And companies have shifted their
positions
based according to what Mr.
Trump seems to
be saying.
Overall, how many jobs are we
talking about
here that are going to be
staying in the U.S.?
JOSH BOAK: Well, as far as
Ford's announcement
today, they're looking to hire
700 workers
starting in 2018.
When we look at Carrier, that's
800 jobs.
When we look last week at
Sprint, that's 5,000
jobs.
OneWeb, that's 3,000 jobs.
Now, that sounds like a lot in
an individual
announcement, but the U.S.
economy is massive.
It added 2.25 million jobs last
year alone.
That's so great, that this is
really a drop
in the bucket in the big
picture.
But it's massive symbolically.
We can't forget that part of
economics is
psychology and the animal
spirits, and Trump
is really stirring them right
now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, do you
credit these
moves to Donald Trump?
I mean, he would love to take
credit for them,
and we have seen him do that
many times in
the past.
Do you credit him with what we
saw out of
Ford today?
JOSH BOAK: Well, many of the
chief executives
involved in these decisions are
crediting
Donald Trump or attributing
their decisions
to him.
And they have benefited from
that.
Last week, with the Sprint deal,
for example,
we saw Masayoshi Son say this
has been the
result of actions by the Trump
administration.
And giving credit to Donald
Trump has actually
been good for these companies.
Sprint's stock is up more than
40 percent,
as of last Friday, since Trump
became president.
So, if the bottom line is what
these CEOs
really care about, then being on
Trump's side
thus far has been profitable.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, how much
of this -- getting
back to the point you made, how
much of this
is about economics and how much
of this is
about politics?
Is this about a substantial
change in manufacturing
policy by these companies, or is
this about
being on the right side of
public opinion?
JOSH BOAK: Well, it's critical
to note there
actually hasn't been a policy
change, just
a series of tweets and public
statements and
phone calls.
We haven't seen a policy
overhaul.
We have seen the promise of
policy overhauls
on regulatory and tax issues,
but those haven't
been manifest yet.
So what this really appears to
be is a president-elect
able to exercise power on social
media in
a way that's unprecedented.
And corporations have seen
benefits to responding
to that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We saw
president-elect Trump
leaning on GM today.
Is this, in your mind, just the
new paradigm,
that companies in the U.S. have
to prepare
for the fact that you might have
the president-elect
or the soon-to-be president just
naming them
and shaming them?
JOSH BOAK: It's definitely
possible.
Business leaders I have talked
to have said
that they expect to have a
bullseye on them.
But what we have also seen
talking with members
of the Trump transition team is
that Donald
Trump sees these actions and
interventions
as a way to stay connected with
his voting
base.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Do you think
that these
-- as you mentioned, this is not
necessarily
a reflection of a new policy.
Like, do you have any sense how
Trump might
-- how this might translate,
these actions
might translate into a more
cohesive economic
policy going forward?
JOSH BOAK: Well, he ran on the
premise of
America first.
And that was all part of the
greater make
America great again theme.
He's clearly said that he wants
to increase
manufacturing jobs.
And so this seems to be a
component of that.
The question is how he goes
about that.
We don't have the policy
details, although
he has suggested that he will
impose a border
tax of some kind on companies
that move jobs
overseas.
He's also suggested that he's
going to cut
regulation, which increases
profits for a
lot of these companies.
What remains to be seen is
whether he can
create jobs on a meaningful
scale and generate
the kind of economic growth
that's he's actually
promised, about 3.5 percent a
year.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It seems to be
he has got
a carrots-and-sticks policy
going here.
He's going to offer them,
potentially, less
regulations and thus lower
taxes, and then
also threaten to put this tax on
them if they
try to leave the country.
Do you think that there's an
appetite in Congress
to actually put those measures
into place?
JOSH BOAK: Well, that remains to
be seen.
What executives like Ford CEO
Mark Fields
has said when he talks about his
decision
on Mexico is to say -- is to
emphasize the
taxes and deregulation.
He is focusing on the carrots,
not the sticks.
Business leaders are emphasizing
those carrots,
which means that they either
don't want to
address the sticks or they don't
think the
sticks are likely to happen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You have
obviously been
covering economic policy for a
long time.
How unusual is this, to have a
president-elect
naming companies by name and
singling them
-- singling them out, and then
them responding?
JOSH BOAK: It's unprecedented
because he hasn't
assumed office yet.
More importantly, he's doing so
on social
media and other venues that
presidents historically
have not had.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just because
it hasn't existed.
JOSH BOAK: Exactly.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Josh Boak, AP,
thank you very much for being
here.
JOSH BOAK: Thank you.
ALISON STEWART: We continue our
look at the
Obama years and his legacy.
Tonight, we focus on a subject
that often
gets less attention, public
education.
Much of what happens in the
classroom is decided
at the state and local level.
But the federal government can
also be a big
player in some of the most
personal issues
for families, which is also the
focus of our
weekly segment Making the Grade.
Throughout most of his term,
President Obama
and his former education
secretary, Arne Duncan,
exercised far more power and
influence in
education than many of their
predecessors.
One major focus, a demand for
greater student
testing tied directly to teacher
evaluation
and, crucially, federal money
for schools.
Duncan was essentially the
gatekeeper of billion
of stimulus money known as Race
to the Top.
Districts could qualify if they
agreed to
meet those criteria.
Initially, many states joined
in.
But, over time, resistance began
building
to testing, data-driven metrics,
and whether
teachers were being judged
unfairly.
The president himself addressed
those concerns.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
When we talk about testing,
parents worry
that it means more teaching to
the test.
Some worry that tests are
culturally biased.
Teachers worry that they will be
evaluated
solely on the basis of a single
standardized
test.
Everybody thinks that's unfair.
It is unfair.
But that's not what Race to the
Top is about.
What Race to the Top says is,
there's nothing
wrong with testing.
We just need better tests
applied in a way
that helps teachers and
students, instead
of stifling what teachers and
students do
in the classroom.
ALISON STEWART: It also led to a
backlash
of state standards known as the
Common Core.
JULIA SASS RUBIN, Save Our
Schools New Jersey:
They're impacting the kind of
education kids
are getting, because they're
eating up a lot
of introduction time with test
preparation
and test drilling.
WOMAN: On this issue, we are
shoulder to shoulder,
parents, conservatives,
progressives, the
teachers.
We're all opposed to this
because this is
not about learning, this is not
about education.
ALISON STEWART: The
administration promoted
the expansion of charter
schools, and pointed
to a national graduation rate
topping 83 percent.
At the same time, the
president's team took
a bigger role in higher
education.
It became the direct lender to
students, instead
of having the loans made
directly by banks.
Savings were used to expand Pell
Grants.
And the administration took aim
at the world
of for-profit colleges, cracking
down on federal
funds and contending that
students were frequently
not well-served by the schools.
Let's dig a little deeper into
the Obama legacy
in education with two people who
have covered
it extensively, Alyson Klein of
our partners
at Education Week, and Scott
Jaschik of Inside
Higher Ed.
Thanks to both of you for being
here.
Let's talk about what the Obama
administration
wanted to do when it first got
into office.
Alyson, what was one thing that
they wanted
to tackle about through K-12
education immediately?
ALYSON KLEIN, Education Week:
So, they were
in a very fortunate position
when they first
came into office, in that the
Obama administration
was given $100 billion for
education through
the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act,
better known as the stimulus.
And with some of that money
through a program
known as Race to the Top, they
were able to
prod states to adopt college and
career-ready
standards, better known as the
Common Core,
new forms of teacher evaluation
that relied
in part on student test scores,
and dramatic
ways of turning around the
lowest performing
schools, including getting rid
of principals
and many teachers.
ALISON STEWART: All right, we
will unpack
that in a little bit.
Same question for you, Scott,
about higher
education.
What did the Obama
administration wanted to
tackle right away?
SCOTT JASCHIK, Inside Higher
Education: Sure.
In President Obama's first state
of the union,
he said something no president
had said before,
which is that every American
needs at least
one year of post-secondary
training to succeed
in today's economy.
And you see that priority
reflected in much
that the administration did,
proposals for
free community college, putting
more money
into aid for low-income
students.
The key difference between past
administrations
is that I would say,
historically, the focus
of higher ed policy has been on
helping middle-class
families who were already going
to send their
children to college to do so in
more affordable
ways.
President Obama focused on the
students who
weren't going, those who needed
higher education,
but were not seeking it.
ALISON STEWART: Alyson, let's
unpack a little
bit of what you talked about.
Testing became a buzzword among
K-12 education,
associated with Common Core
state standards.
The Common Core was obviously an
idea, a way
to have a federal standard, so
that students
in Nevada could be compared to
students in
Texas.
What happened in theory with
Common Core and
testing vs. what happened in
practice?
ALYSON KLEIN: So, the Obama
administration
didn't tell states that they had
to adopt
the Common Core standards, but
they did give
them, a number of states, money
who chose
to do that.
And they also used some of the
money from
the stimulus which I talked
about to help
states develop new, more
innovative forms
of tests aligned with those
standards.
But they were really demanding a
lot from
states at once.
Teach had to adjust to brand-new
standards
that were much more rigorous in
many cases
than the standards they had
before and brand-new
types of tests.
And it just put a lot of
pressure on a system.
ALISON STEWART: And also on
teacher evaluations.
That became a very difficult
subject, because
you had teachers in certain
schools with certain
sort of support and scaffolding
being compared
to teachers in other schools
perhaps in more
affluent areas.
ALYSON KLEIN: Yes, that's right.
And one of the big issues with
teacher evaluation
is that teachers felt that it
didn't necessarily
reward them for taking on more
challenging
groups of students.
And, as I mentioned before, the
tests and
the standards were changing at
the same time
that teacher performance was
being held to
those tests.
So, they really felt like that
was an unfair
situation for them.
ALISON STEWART: Charter schools
was another
big part of the Obama
administration's push.
I believe there was something
like $208 million
for charter schools in
2008-2009.
And that's up to $333 million,
approximately,
now.
Why the focus on charter
schools?
ALYSON KLEIN: So, charter
schools are one
of the few areas of K-12
education policy
where Democrats and Republicans
really see
eye to eye for the most part.
The Obama administration in
particular really
pushed states that had lowest --
low-performing
schools to consider turning
those schools
into a charter.
But they also asked states to
set a high bar
for charters, make sure that
charters were
serving all different kinds of
students, students
in special education and
English-language
learners, and were being held to
the same
standards as regular public
schools.
ALISON STEWART: Scott, let's
bring you into
the conversation.
SCOTT JASCHIK: Sure.
ALISON STEWART: You mentioned
bringing new
people into the higher education
population.
How did the president and his
administration
make this possible?
Were they successful with
bringing people
in to the higher population,
higher education
population that wouldn't have
been there before?
SCOTT JASCHIK: Many times, they
were successful,
but not the way he proposed it.
ALISON STEWART: What does that
mean?
SCOTT JASCHIK: So, take free
community college.
President Obama proposed a
state-federal partnership
that would make community
college free.
Congress never touched it.
So, you could say, on one hand,
nothing happened.
But the reality is that
districts all over
the country took the idea and
ran with it.
And so there are free community
college programs
in individual districts all over
the country.
Also, I would say, by talking
about the issue,
President Obama put much more
emphasis on
that choice than you ever saw
before.
President Obama and also
Michelle Obama used
their bully pulpits to say, hey,
it's important
to go.
And they said -- they linked it
over and over
again to jobs that students
would need for
the future.
And in that sense, I think he
changed the
conversation.
Community colleges used to be
sort of a side
issue.
He made them much more central.
He also focused a lot on
endorsing alternative
ways to go to college.
He's a fan of online education,
competency-based
education, all kinds of new
approaches that,
again, he used the bully pulpit
to promote,
not so much federal legislation,
but with
attention.
ALISON STEWART: How about
dealing with income
inequality?
We see that in secondary
education.
Kids who come from well-to-do
families often
go to college.
It's a very small percentage of
people who
come from lower-income families.
What did he do and his
administration do to
help those folks?
SCOTT JASCHIK: So, early on, he
promoted large
increases -- and he got some --
in Pell Grants,
which is the largest federal
program for low-income
students.
He wasn't thrilled with the
results, though,
because a lot of the money ended
up going
to students at for-profit
institutions, where
he questioned the quality.
So, I think that's part of what
led him to
free community college, to focus
attention
on another sector.
He also focused a lot on the
quality of institutions.
He wasn't, you know, looking at
community
colleges through rose-colored
glasses.
He talked about the need for
them to improve
their graduation rates, to
improve their -- the
connection between their job
training programs
and actual careers.
So, he was putting attention
there, not on
Harvard and Stanford.
ALISON STEWART: What about
attention about
what's going on, on campus?
There were so many stories about
sexual assault
issues on campuses in the past
year-and-a-half.
SCOTT JASCHIK: I think this is
an area where
the Obama administration played
a very significant
role.
One, they talked about it a lot,
not just
the Education Department, but
President Obama,
Vice President Biden, in
repeated events.
They also, the administration
changed the
rules.
They told colleges to change the
burden of
proof when colleges were
considering these
cases, saying it had to only be
a preponderance
of evidence.
So, that's a lower standard
than, say, guilty
beyond a reasonable doubt.
And they empowered the Office
for Civil Rights
at the Education Department to
have resources
to do more investigations, so,
attention and
policy, at the same time that
activists on
campuses were raising the issue
more than
ever.
ALISON STEWART: A final question
for both
of you.
What do you think will be the
lasting impact
of his education legacy, the
thing that will
stick around, regardless of
what's going on
in terms of politics?
ALYSON KLEIN: That's a great
question.
I would say one of the big
focuses of the
administration was on turning
around the lowest-performing
schools.
And that's something that's been
enshrined
in a law called the Every
Student Succeeds
Act.
States will still have to focus
on schools
that are just at the bottom of
the barrel
when it comes to performers.
So, that's something that I
expect to continue
no matter who's in the White
House.
ALISON STEWART: What do you
think, Scott?
SCOTT JASCHIK: I would say this
idea of free
college, even though he didn't
get it.
Today, New York's governor
proposed free public
higher education.
That comes out of the Sanders
and Clinton
plans, but I also think it comes
out of the
Obama proposal about free
community college.
Eight years ago, people were not
talking about
the idea of free college.
Now they are.
ALISON STEWART: Scott Jaschik
and Alyson Klein,
thanks for joining us.
ALYSON KLEIN: Thank you.
SCOTT JASCHIK: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Is it time to Reevaluate
the value of
having a job?
On our Making Sense page,
history professor
and author James Livingston
shares an excerpt
from his book "No More Work."
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
ALISON STEWART: Tune in later
tonight on "Charlie
Rose": breaking down the new
round of saber-rattling
over North Korea's nukes.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Alison Stewart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.